Hello, I’m Glen Mével and today I will show you
how to specify a concurrent
datastructure under weak memory.
Nowadays concurrency is everywhere,
and all real-world shared memories
have some counter-intuitive behaviors.
So not only do we want to verify
concurrent data structures,
but we want to verify them against an actual model
of memory — what we call a “weak” memory model.
Our paper’s contribution is a specification
and a proof of a particular fine-grained
concurrent queue, in the weak
memory model of Multicore OCaml.
In this talk, we won’t cover the
proof nor the implementation,
but we’ll see how to write a usable spec for it.
Concurrency poses a number of challenges.
We want to specify a data structure,
such that we allow sharing it between threads.
So one challenge is with shared ownership and,
as we’ll see, solving this involves some form
of atomicity. The operations of a concurrent
data structure must behave as if they were atomic,
and it’s something we must specify, somehow.
Another challenge is with weak memory. With
weak memory, you need to be explicit about how
threads synchronize. So specs must
expose useful synchronizations.
And often, fine-grained implementations offer
less synchronizations than a lock-based one.
We will tackle these challenges by using Cosmo,
which is our concurrent program
logic for Multicore OCaml.
Just to get familiar with notations, let’s
start with a non-concurrent specification.
We have 3 operations: ‘make’, ‘enqueue’,  ‘dequeue’.
We specify them using Hoare triples.
A triple is made of a precondition formula,
a program fragment and a postcondition formula.
We have a representation predicate ‘IsQueue‘,
which asserts that ‘q’ is a memory location
storing a well-formed queue data structure whose
items are, in order, the values in the given list.
We are in separation logic, so conjunction
is denoted with an asterisk ‘∗’, and the
assertion ‘IsQueue’ is not duplicable; rather,
it asserts the unique ownership of the queue.
Now let’s enter concurrency. For now, let’s
assume “sequential consistency”; that is,
a program always behaves as some
interleaving of its threads.
We want to specify a queue
which can be used concurrently.
Can we simply keep the spec that we just saw?
Well, this spec is still valid; but to use it,
a thread needs the unique ownership of the queue,
so that effectively prevents concurrent uses.
And it makes sense, because there is no reason to
believe that the data structure is
thread-safe… unless we specify it.
So let’s consider a queue that
is thread-safe. To see how
to reflect thread-safety in the spec, let’s
adopt for a moment the point of view of the user.
As a user of a concurrent data structure, we
want to share its ownership among threads.
In a concurrent separation logic, such as Iris,
we can do it by putting it in an “invariant”.
An invariant is an assertion which holds at all
times, and in which we can put whatever resource
we want. Then, it is the invariant itself which
owns the resource and any thread can access it.
To access it, we “open” the invariant
around a program fragment ‘e’; that is,
before running ‘e’ we obtain the contents of
the invariant, and afterwards we return it.
Now the issue: for soundness
in the face of concurrency,
we can only open an invariant for
at most one step of execution.
This is a problem because the number of steps is
a low-level implementation detail, and as a user,
we have no idea whether the operations
complete in one step — and it’s unlikely.
So the user cannot use a queue-sharing invariant,
around the specs that we have written earlier.
But doing so would be reasonable,
because a concurrent queue
has to be implemented in such a way that its
operations look atomic to the user.
For this, Iris provides us a notion
of “logically atomic triples”
(which we’ll denote with angle brackets,
instead of curly brackets). It’s something
we can define in the logic, I won’t show how,
but the key point is this couple of properties.
First, a logically atomic triple
entails the regular triple.
Second, we can open invariants around it freely.
This is a way of stating that ‘e’ is
“logically atomic” or, more formally, that
there is a step in the execution of ‘e’
such that ‘e’ behaves as if
everything happened during that step.
It is this step which satisfies the Hoare
triple with ‘P’ and ‘Q’. So ‘P’ and ‘Q’ need
not hold at the start and end of ‘e’, but only
just before and just after the atomic step.
Because of this, we need a binder to be able to
name things which we only know during the atomic
step, when we actually open the invariant.
So here, ‘x’ is bound in both ‘P’ and ‘Q’.
Fine! With logical atomicity, let’s strenghten
our previous spec for concurrent uses.
The spec of ‘make’ does not change,
because we do not need it to be atomic.
For ‘enqueue’ and ‘dequeue’,
we do the following changes:
* we replace the regular triples
with logically atomic triples;
* we bind the queue state
explicitely in the triples;
and that’s it.
We now have a usable spec for a concurrent queue,
but that was under sequential consistency.
Sequential consistency is an unrealistic
assumption for the modern world,
so we have to embrace weaker models of memory.
A well-known one is that of C11, and here we
are interested in that of Multicore OCaml.
A way of describing such models is by saying that
each thread has its own view of the shared state.
For Multicore OCaml, this has been made
formal by people at Cambridge (reference on slide)
and, based on this, we have built Cosmo,
a program logic for Multicore OCaml.
A few words about Cosmo. Cosmo is based on Iris,
hence we inherit all of its features:
separation logic and so on.
Its distinctive trait is that in
general, assertions are “subjective”:
we are reasoning under an implicit ambient view,
which represents the current view of the
current thread, and assertions may depend on it.
For instance, ‘x pointsto 42’ is subjective:
maybe we see that ‘x’ is storing 42
because we have written it, but our write has
not been propagated to other threads yet,
and they still see an earlier value for ‘x’.
With that said, a limitation with subjective
assertions is that invariants are still available
to all threads. So the assertions that they store
cannot depend on the view of a specific thread.
They are restricted to “objective” assertions.
Back to our queue: recall that we want to share
the queue in an invariant. So, its representation
predicate must be objective. And we make this
objectivity requirement a part of the specs.
Do we need any other modification
to the previous spec?
It is still usable in limited cases, but for the
general case it lacks thread synchronization.
Let’s consider an example. Thread
A writes to some memory region,
then enqueues a pointer to that
region. Thread B dequeues the pointer.
Now thread B expects to read the memory
region in the state in which A has left it.
But remember that we are in
weak memory. So it’s not because
A knows it has written 3 to ‘x[1]’,
that B knows it too.
So we want the queue to guarantee that, when
dequeuing, B learns about all writes known by A.
It’s a typical “release-acquire” pattern.
This is a side effect that we
need, so it must be specified.
From the logical perspective, the user
wants to transfer pointsto assertions
from A to B but, as I said, pointsto
assertions are subjective, so the user
cannot simply put them in an invariant.
We need something more.
It’s time for me to explain how views
and synchronization work in Cosmo.
We have an abstract notion of views. It
comes equipped with an inclusion relation:
the larger, the more up-to-date.
To manipulate views, we have new
kinds of assertions in the logic.
First, ‘↑ V‘ means that
the ambient view contains ‘V’.
Thus it’s the archetypical subjective assertion.
Second, ‘P @ V’ where ‘P’ is any assertion,
means “P with the ambient view fixed to V”.
‘P @ V’ is objective even if ‘P’ is subjective.
These assertions satisfy several
rules, in particular this one:
any assertion ‘P’ can be decomposed into an
assertion ‘↑ V’ and an assertion ‘P @ V’,
for some view ‘V’; and conversely.
That’s how we can transfer ‘P’
between threads: we isolate
all of its subjective knowledge
into a component ‘↑ V’,
so that what’s left is an objective assertion
‘P @ V’, which we can share in an invariant.
So, to achieve a transfer of ‘P’, we
just have to transfer view assertions,
and this has a runtime meaning:
this is thread synchronization.
Back to our queue again, we want to say that,
for each item, there is a synchronization
— that is, a view transfer —
from the enqueuer to the dequeuer.
The idea is to pretend that the queue
stores the views being transferred.
So there is now one view for each item, and the
representation predicate now looks like this.
If we recall the previous spec,
it is now augmented with views,
and the view transfer happens like that.
The enqueuer pushes its current view into the
queue, alongside the enqueued item.
In the pre. we use an assertion ‘↑ V’ for capturing
the current view — or in fact, any portion of it,
as chosen by the user of the spec.
Conversely, the dequeuer pulls the
view that comes with the item.
It gets that same ‘↑ V’, which means
that now its current view includes ‘V’.
It’s really a release-acquire pattern.
I’d like to draw your attention
to something. You may wonder
how this approach to specification
compares with refinement.
In a typical refinement-based
spec, you would say something like:
“this queue can be used everywhere we can
use a naïve queue protected by a lock.”
But, in weak memory, this spec has
a shortcoming: the lock induces
synchronizations between all pairs of
operations, even though many lock-free queues
do not guarantee them — because precisely, we
try to reduce unnecessary synchronizations.
By contrast, our spec is weaker, for
instance it does not guarantee any
dequeuer-to-enqueuer synchronization.
So we can specify more implementations.
To recap, I’ve shown several tools for
reasoning about concurrent programs.
Invariants are well-known already.
To use invariants to their full power,
we need to pay attention to atomicity in specs;
for that, we have logically atomic triples.
What’s new is that now, we want to support
weak memory, and for that, we have views.
My claim is that the combination of
these tools works — logical atomicity is
compatible with weak memory – and it’s
expressive enough for specifying and proving
fine-grained concurrent programs,
while remaining quite natural to use.
I’ve only talked about specification, but
there is more in the paper. We have a proof
of the spec for a non-trivial lock-free queue. It
demonstrates the benefit of our approach because
this implementation has less synchronizations
than a lock-based queue, so it’s not a refinement.
By the way, at the time we were working
on that proof, other people were working
on a refinement proof of a very similar
data structure, under sequential consistency,
so you can have a look at their paper too
(reference on slide).
We also have a proof of a
simple client application
which demonstrates that our spec is usable.
All of this takes place in Iris, a very
powerful separation logic framework.
Last but not least, by the virtue
of Coq, everything is machine-checked.
Thank you for your attention!